>> My name is Phil Kerly and I'm from
the Intel Software Solutions group.
Today Mike and I are going to be presenting
on threading for performance using OpenMP
in the Intel threading building blocks on Mac OS X.
This is session 102 so hopefully you are in the right spot.
Wanted to give a little bit about some of the
motivation for this talk, if you look back in the history
of the Apple products the first 20 years we were basically
on a single threaded processing execution type CPU.
After about 1976 started hittivng Duo Core or dual
processors, within about eight years we got into Quad Core
which was just two years ago and
right now we are hitting eight cores.
Intel is extremely enthusiastic about trying to help
software engineers improve their productivity in terms
of threading because this is going to keep increasing.
We're not going to slow down in
terms of the number of threads
of execution we are going to be providing to developers.
And I talk about threads of process or execution instead of
processors because it use to be that we had individual CPU's
and then in the old Pentium 4 days we added something called
hyper threading which enabled multiple threads of execution.
Then we moved that to multiple cores and so there is many
kinds of permutations that this really falls into for Intel.
But in any case we need to be able to increase our
productivity in terms of threading our applications.
So that's really what today is all about.
So I'm going to talk a little bit about OpenMP, the
specification and I am going to talk a little bit
about Intel threading building
blocks which we also call TBB.
But the reality is in an hour,
hour and half talk there is no way
that we can cover the full breath
and dept of these two technologies.
SO what I am really hoping to do is that by the end of
this talk I will have at least covered enough material
to influence you to actually go and investigate these
technologies, maybe we'll see a little spy kit or downloads
on our Intel complier or our TBB product.
Hopefully that is what will happen over the next week.
So the agenda that I had for today is really to talk
about what I consider to be the fundamental principals
of threading for performance, just
so that we have a common base line.
Cover OpenMP with the specification
with a high level overview.
And them Mike Lewis is going to come up and do a little
demo for us in terms of implementing an application
that was already threaded but it was threaded for a
functional perspective and apply OpenMP to that application
and then compare that implementation
to a POSIX treaded implementation
and look at the performance and the implementation.
Then we'll move on to TBB and again Mike will give
us a little bit of insight into what it took to port
that same application to TBB, look at it's performance.
And then we'll talk a little bit towards the end about where
these tools leave off and where the real engineering begins,
the hard part, the work we all have to do.
So I really have four fundamental principals and
the first one I have up here is parallel algorithms.
Without having parallel algorithms, whether they
be functionally decomposed or dated decomposed,
if we can come up with a solution for how we would
conceptually implement the algorithm then we are not going
to achieve performance by threading.
We clearly have to minimize the overhead of threading,
if you look at the old days, three years ago.
If you threaded your application for a Dual
processor platform, you know it's fairly easy to get
or to minimize the threading in overhead compared to the
amount of work that you are actually going to accomplish.
But with eight cores that challenge becomes a lot tougher
as we start subdividing or data decomposing our application
and our task, then the overhead becomes a little bit harder,
becomes a little bit larger compared to that level of work.
Just because we have a parallel algorithm and we
minimize the overhead, we also have to balance
that workload across those execution units.
As we go through the talk today we will go through
a few examples where that is a little bit tricky
and how both OpenMP and TBB can
help with balancing those workloads.
And finally anything that has to do with performance has
to taken in to consideration the hardware architecture.
And all of these are actually very
intertwined with one another.
As you try to make your algorithm more parallel and
you spread them out among more cores the relative ratio
of the work you accomplish for your task verses the overhead
that ratio changes, the threading overhead gets larger.
As we start subdividing that work and we put it across more
cores, more threads of execution, balance in that workload
across those multiple threads of
execution becomes more challenging.
And as we increase the differences in the hardware and we
move from a true symmetric multi processing type of platform
to something that's a kin to more of a newma
type architecture where not every execution,
engine that you are executing on necessarily has
the same power or performance as every other core
that you might be running on, there's
differences between those execution units.
We clearly saw that with hyper threading with today
processors or today's Mac Pro platform with eight threads
of execution or eight cores, some of those cores share
the same cache and some of them sit on the same bus
and some don't and so there are
differences in the performance capabilities
of those individual cores as they relate to one another.
So as I look at this list of fundamental principals for
threading for performance, its clear to me that some
of the things we do, we tend to do repetitively
because there more automatic, there more mechanical
and less about the algorithm or
what we're trying to achieve.
For example using the hardware architecture we
have to detect the number of detection units
that we are actually going to run on, how many
cores or how many processors or how many threads
of execution does the hardware actually support.
We need to detect that right and that's pretty standard
process of doing that and anyone that's doing multithreading
for performance is going to have some
technique or some natural way of doing that.
If you do any kind of cache blocking where you are going
to detect the size of the cache and modify the perimeters
by which you are doing your parallel data
decomposition you have to detect the size of the cache
from the hardware in order to make that, make that change.
So those kinds of things tend to be more automatic,
tend to be things that you'll do repeatedly
from implementation to implementation.
So what I hope to show is that with OpenMP and with Intel
threading building block that some of that mechanical stuff
that we are use to doing can actually be
taken over by these technologies and allow you
to actually improve your productivity by focusing on
the problem at hand and focusing on the constraints
under which your application are running.
So let's talk a little but about OpenMP.
First its not a standard but actually a specification
from a group of industry companies that were interested
in promoting threading and they really
specifically targeted shared memory multiprocessing,
not necessarily symmetric multiprocessing
but shared memory multiprocessing.
The other thing they did is that they kind of looked at
that motivational slide and said well we have a lot of code
out there that is actually serial code and we
want to move people and get them moving more
and the developers more and more
into a threading environment.
So it really was started to try to get
encouraged threading serial code incrementally.
So it's not a big bang type of approach to threading.
You can actually go to the OpenMP org website and actually
see the full specification and it will actually allow
for vendor specific implementation
or extensions to the specification.
OpenMP is something that has to be supported by
a complier and in this case Intel's C++
and Fortran compliers do support OpenMP on Mac OS X.
SO what is OpenMP, it's really a set of programming
directives supported by some library routines.
There are some environment variables that
help you control the runtime environment,
great for debugging and performance tuning.
And then of course there are vendor extensions and we'll
talk about Intel's extensions as part of this session today.
Like I said before, I'm hoping to just provide
an overview and not the complete specification,
it would just take much longer then an hour and
half talk but kind of the main points to OpenMP
and the programming directives are
the four that I have listed here.
There is what's called a parallel for
which allows you to using this pragma,
parallelize for loops have a defined start and ending
index and parallelize that naturally using the pragma's.
That's more of a day to decomposition approach but OpenMP
also supports what's called parallel sections or sections
which allow you to do more of a
functional type of threading.
If you actually wrote serial code in
which you called function A and function B
and there was really no dependences
between the two and you could reorder them,
then parallel sections might be a quick
way to actually thread that between them.
And then there were some other kind of natural things
that could be done with pragma's that did not have
to be implemented using function calls that allowed and
supported threading as well, such as critical sections
and variable in which all threads have to achieve
that variable before they can move beyond it.
You augment these work sharing constructs
with data sharing clauses appended to them.
And here are a few examples, as part of that
for loop, the data you have within that loop,
you can define those as being shared
type data, can be private type data.
You can have first private in which all the threads
get the first value at initialization is all the same
and then after the threads start executing they
are actually private to the threads themselves.
And then it supports such things as reduction.
Reduction is an example of a reduction would be if you
had an array that you just wanted to sum up all the values
in the array, you could logically construct
a parallel for algorithm that could operate
on that array by subdividing it into smaller pieces.
Doing subtotals on each of those sections and then at
the end doing the total reduction and just taking the sum
of the sub values and adding them together.
So OpenMP can support that type of paradigm as well.
Talked a little bit about workload balancing and it was
clear that not just one type of scheduling algorithm worked
for all types of workloads and so Open MP
supports three types of scheduling algorithm,
one is static another is dynamic and then we have guided
and as we go through the talk I will actually show examples
of these individual type of scheduling algorithms.
The pragma themselves are not sufficient to actually give
a complete or a robust set of tools in order to be able
to implement threading even on simple for loops.
There's often application specific activities
that require more then just a critical section.
And so the OpenMP standard or specification allows for
some of these threads synchronization type routines
and in this case setting lock,
unlocking locks and testing locks.
It also allows you to query and set some of
the run time execution routines for the values.
For example you can actually set the number of
threads, if you don't set the number of threads,
OpenMP will actually detect it from
the hardware and it will implement
or use that many threads across the parallel section.
But you can actually change that, not all applications
are well suited to complete well balanced environments
where the number of threads equaling the
number of executions units is sufficient.
And then you could also query, you know what thread am I, so
you may have some specific implementation in your algorithm
that you want to know and assign a particular
thread to some particular thread of execution.
And then there are timing routines.
If we're threading for performance you know we want to know
how long do things take and so there were some standard type
of routines that were added to support just
actually being able to query the system time
and be able to do those types of evaluations.
So the pragma's, the libraries and now is supported
by the environment variables so that in addition
to what you are doing programmatically you have
the option of actually dynamically changing these,
some of these parameters without actually
having to recompile your code and executing.
Great for supporting you know performance evaluation,
so here OpenMP schedule basically allows you
to define exactly what kind of the three scheduling types,
what scheduler do you want and what is the chunk size.
The chunk size is basically how do you want to divide up in
that for loop that your using, how do you want to divide
up that chunk, in terms of how much
chunk should each thread operate on.
And we'll cover more about that as we proceed.
You can change the number of threads, so we had the
routine that will allow you to change it in the code.
But we also have an environment variable
that allows you to change it on the fly.
So you could actually write a script dynamically change
the number of threads, gather your performance data
and see if that's you know what is the
optimal number of threads that you need.
We have dynamic, which is basically
enables or allows the OpenMP runtime
to dynamically change the number of
threads that you are going to use.
Some OpenMP implementation support this and some don't.
This allows you to enable and disable
that type of feature and then nest it.
So its conceivable that you can have a pragma
on a for loop and then somewhere in the body
of that for loop you have another for loop, so that would
be a condition of where you have nested OpenMP directives
and the question is really, you know if your running it
on a eight way system do you really want eight threads
of execution or do you want, or is your
implementation such that you want to run 16 threads.
And so you can actually enable or
disable parallel constructs in which
that second parallel for would be ignored.
And all of these, so you don't get too concerned that you
know if you implement this using OpenMP in your application
that somebody can actually go in and start
fiddling with the behavior of your application.
If you actually write these and use the library
routines, they override the environment variables.
So Intel's extension to OpenMP, we allow
you to modify and control the stack size.
Some people are concerned about the
foot print of their application.
Some you know are very knowledgeable of exactly how large
the stack is and want to be able to control that capability.
We have threaded local memory,
allocation routines so that you can modify
or manage your own memory allocation within the routines.
And then Intel also implemented something
called the KMP block time and this is really
to control the spin waits of how
the locks operate with an OpenMP.
And we'll talk a little about that when I show the example.
So here's an OpenMP for loop, its fairly basic.
It's a for loop, it has a defined starting index
and it has a defined end, happens to be a parameter
but it is a defined end and then
there is a for loop within that.
So this could e some serial code, and by simply adding
a pragma OpenMP parallel for assignment or pragma,
we can actually parallelize this loop very simply.
Now the private's required because
if you look at the second for loop,
the second for loop is actually updating the J
variable and if we allow, if we didn't control access
to that J variable then any thread could actually
modify that and so here we have to make it private.
Now an OpenMP it's possible that maybe most
of your threads or variables are private.
So you may want to actually make the default
for how variables are handled as shared,
or you could make the default as private.
Currently the default or the standard default is shared,
you can also specify it to none which means that you have
to specify every variable and sometimes its actually good to
do that because then you can look at the compiler will spit
out all of the information about which variables you
have not defined as shared or private and you have
to make a determination on exactly
how you want those shared.
So in this case A, B and N are all shared by default,
the variable I which is the index for
the parallel for loop is private.
It has to be private in that case but what's interesting
if you look at this for loop is that its not,
it is also dependent on the index I, which means that this
for loop is not going to be a well balanced for loop.
The work that happens when I is one that means J is going
to go from zero to one where as what I is a 100 then
that for loop is going to go from zero
to 99 or whatever, 100 in this case.
So what would happen if we actually ran this using
the Open MP static scheduler which is the default,
we would get something that looks like this, we didn't
specify this scheduler and we didn't specify the chunk size
so OpenMP is going to take the total workload, the total
number or indices that are being operated on within I
and its going to statically allocate them and divide that
by the number of threads that its actually going to use.
This example I use for threads.
But because a workload is not balanced what
will happen is that threads will execute.
First one you know may take a long time to run, the
second one a little bit shorter and a little bit shorter.
So we already violated the balanced
workload fundamental principal
for performing, implementing threads for performance.
And actually if you opened up Shark, this is a Shark view
of system trace if you haven't used Shark I'd encourage you
to do so, it's defiantly very good for
analyzing your threading behavior especially
if you are not familiar with your application.
And what we see in this view, this was taken on an eight
way a Mac Pro eight way system, what we see is that all
of the threads are busy and what we see you can see
the color coding and what the color coding means that,
that's a particular core or a particular
execution CPU for the OS.
And so in this case you see some hopping around of those
threads, sometimes it runs on you know the green runs
on green and then it moves lighter or some other
core that's a lighter green and it runs on pink
and so we see these threads moving
around but there fully busy.
And yet I just showed you that the workflow wasn't balanced.
So of you use that Intel extension that allows you
to modify the KMP block time and you set it to zero.
In other words, don't spin at all if you come up with a
lock or you hit a point at which you can't make progress,
don't spin for a while hoping that lock's going to
be released and you are going to be able to move on.
Actually go ahead and go to sleep and if you look
at that then this is the kind of view you get.
You see their stair stepping a fact and that's
because the second for loop wasn't balanced.
SO what we could do, is we could still use static
OpenMP, scheduler and we could set the chunk size instead
of being N divided by the number of CPU's, we could
just in this case for example define it as one.
Okay and essentially want this allows it to do is
instead of statically allocating all of the indexes
to a particular thread it allows the thread to run.
When it's done it then goes and pulls the next one.
Okay now it's still static in the sense that all of these
threads are going to get them in order but at least now we,
instead of having all of the long workload running on
one single thread of execution it's kind of spread it
out over the multiple threads of execution.
But its still not extremely well balanced here you
still have a little bit of gap towards the end.
So what we can do is we can take that same parallel for
with the private J variable and change the scheduling
to dynamic and in this case define
it as a chunk size of one.
We could of chosen different chunk sizes but
we know that the second for loop is going
to be decreasingly you know less work as we go along
there is no reason to define it as anything larger.
And in that case what OpenMP will do is allow
the static scheduling to look something like,
or the dynamic scheduling to look like this.
In which case every thread pulls for the next work
unit that it needs, so if it takes longer to execute
or even if the thread gets interrupted by the OS to
go off and do some other networking task or whatever
at least the threads will balance out just by simply adding
that one scheduling pragma clause to the pragma statement.
So that was kind of parallel for with the different types
of scheduling algorithms, but you could also implement more
of a functional decomposition and again simply by
just adding the pragma OpenMP parallel sections
and then defining the sections you can actually make each
of those as independent tasks that will run concurrently.
Now the way OpenMP works is that
all of the threads of execution
within the parallel sections have an implicit
join at the end of the parallel section.
It's not always what you want to happen, sometimes these are
independent threads and you may actually want to continue on
and do something else and not necessarily wait.
So OpenMP allows you to add a no wait
statement to the end of that pragma directive.
So what we're going to do now is
we're going to show a little demo.
But first I am going to have Mike come up and explain a
little bit about the demo and what we've done in terms
of analyzing the application and
show a little performance results
that of using OpenMP and comparing that to POSIX threads.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Mike: Thank you Phil.
We put together a demo.
I think it shows this technology off really well.
I'll first start by showing you an introduction
to what or demo does and how it functions
so you have a little background
before we show you actual code.
Here we have some pseudo code.
It shows you pretty much what would
happen in a typical particle system.
In this loop we have everything attracted to one
gravity point it's an order and complexity loop.
Even thought there are a lot of operations that go on
when it recalculates the momentum and velocity vector,
its still order and so you can have a lot of particle's
you don't need a whole lot of computing power.
But if you want something that's a little more complex,
say you wanted to simulate particles in space,
there all attracted to each other,
that's sort of N squared complexity.
You would probably have a loop like this.
In this loop we have a little optimization because
Newton's third law we can update two velocity particles
at the same time.
Unfortunately we wanted to make this thread safe.
We wanted to implement OpenMP for
it, so we had to make a compromise.
If we split this up with an OpenMP parallel for
right now particle J could have a raise condition
when we decrement it and this isn't good.
There is other algorithms we could split
it off and still have this optimization
but for simplicity sake we decided
to just make it this and refactor it.
So it gets about 60 percent of the
performance and we can thread it with OpenMP
and I'll show you the demo we worked on right now.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Mike: So here we have a simulation, you see
particles floating around in space and when they collide
with each other, they absorb each other
and they are all attracted to each other.
This is similar to the previous loop I showed you
in serial code and I'll show you the code right now.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Mike: Here we have the original loop which is
similar to the first more complex loop I showed you
with the optimization, you have the outer loop right here
and we have the inner loop right
around, it's right around here.
We had to refactor is so we got rid of a potential
risk condition here and I'll quickly show you
that this is the hot loop by using Shark.
So we open up Shark, we start a time profile, we have our
process selected, we have a time limit set to five seconds
because if you have a pretty simple application,
you can get a really good sample in five seconds.
So I start Shark.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Mike: And we get a profile right here.
Most of the work is done in this manual loop right here as
you can see and there's actually other accessor functions
for vector class but there all in line so
you'll see most of the work in this one loop.
The names kind of obfuscated because the
optimizations that are going on but if you double click
on it you can see some of the assembling.
You can see that the square root right here is taking up a
lot of processing power on the float division and all that.
So I'll show you how OpenMP can make a really huge
performance difference after I show you some performance
that we are getting right now with the original loop.
So right here you can see our updates for a second,
this is the benchmark that we are using is
how many times the velocity vectors of each
of the particles are updated each second.
So they can be updated between frames, its all concurrent
and it could be slower then each frame, after each frame,
they'll still move around but it won't
be as precise if it updates slower.
So this is our original code that's not thread safe.
I'll tab to a loop that shows our thread safe code.
As you can see the update per second, it's about
60 percent of the original but this is okay
because when we're threading for this we're
going to be able to get theoretically four
or eight times improvement and it's a trade off.
So here's a copy of the thread safe original loop
just so I can show the different loops side by side.
Simply I'll add a pragma statement as Phil showed.
And a reduction since we are incrementing this variable
right here each loop we have to add our reduction
so it doesn't create a raised condition
and try to increment it at the same time.
And we'll build it and here we have our original
loop again, getting about 50 updates per second.
We have our thread safe original getting about 30
updates per 0second and we have our OpenMP version.
We'll just wait a second for the updates to propagate.
We hit about 215, 220 and that's a really huge performance
increase added one line of code, did the refactoring
and get a lot more precision and accuracy
in simulations that are real time.
Now you could do this in native pthreads as well and we
actually did this just to show you how complex it could be
and it wasn't that fun but I'll show you a little
of the code so you can see what we went through.
So we decided to implement a thread pool and you
can see we have pthread, pthread cons, mutexes.
We have a job class and we have all this stuff going on.
I am not going to go into the nitty gritty because there's
too much to go over but I'll show you the size of the code.
And we also have a worker thread
that's implemented right here.
Still a lot of concurrency that you have to
worry about, debugging we had a lot of deadlock
and we just have to work out all those bugs.
And here's where we set it up, we have a structure we have
to make it so it passes a void star pointer to the threads
so we have to figure out a good way to pass
it so we have to set everything up here
and you can get a little more performance
out of using native pthread
so I'll show you a little bit of
the performance that we get.
So we get about 210, 215 with OpenMP and then
with our pthreads implementation we squeeze
out a little bit more performance, its
not significant as about 10 percent
and whatever threading model you choose
to depends on how important the code is.
If you need that 10 percent by all means go for the
pthreads, but if you're just looking for an easy fix
to get most of there performance
possible you can go with OpenMP.
Now I am going to bring you back to Phil he has a
little more to go over with TBB I think and here he is.
( Applause )
>> Phil: Thank you, Mike.
So one of the things we talked about initially was kind of
the four principals and I think you can actually see it,
hopefully saw it applied with Mike's demo.
First of all he needed that parallel algorithm.
The reality is, that the code that he has
received which was implemented as threaded
because it supported a functional thread in terms
of managing a user input and those kinds of threads
and the display thread and then a computational thread.
The serial implementation was optimal for a serial
implementation but it clearly was an optimal for threading.
So even though he had to refactor the code so that it
would be more suited to threading and actually went slower.
In the serial case he was able to you know focus on the
parallelism of the work that he was trying to accomplish
and not on the mechanics of implementing the threading.
So it's kind of amazing that for comparable
performance you know its, you know one line of code,
the few changes that had to happen because he had to
refactor the code to support parallelism versus hundreds
of lines of code to do it in POSIX threads.
So there's huge productivity improvement,
a lot fewer changes, less debugging,
spent a lot less time on actually figuring
out where the synchronization problems were.
We had lots of issues with the POSIX's version initially,
and he focuses on the behavior okay and the constraints.
So initially when we first looked at that threading
algorithm we actually took the serial implementation
and just threw OpenMP at it and we didn't get the
performance that we were expecting, one because it had a bug
in it and two because we needed to take care
of the fact that we had this extra constraint
that we were updating two variables
in the array verses the single one.
And so putting any kind of OpenMP synchronization or
critical sections around that really impacted performance
but still we got to those kinds of decisions much quicker
and then we were able to focus on the actual performance
and so clearly with OpenMP, okay we only got 90 percent but
you know what it took 10 percent of the time more or less
and actually got along way to where we needed
to be versus the POSIX's implementation.
So let's contrast that a little bit with
the Intel threading building blocks.
It's another approach to implementing threading.
Again tries to hide some of the mechanics
much like OpenMP does from the developer
and allow you to focus on the problem space.
And so one thing it does is because it's because
it's an optimized library we're not constrained
by just implementing or using pragmas.
There's a lot complex threading models that are supported
by Intel's threading building blocks that OpenMP.
OpenMP supports the parallel for in parallel sections
implementation where as we'll see once we get into TBB
that there's a lot more threading models that
can be applied much, much easier using TBB.
It's C++ so there's no Fortran,
so OpenMP is supported by the Intel
complier both on C, C++ and Fortran.
We do not have the equivalent library in Fortran on TBB.
It is based on templates where
as OpenMP is based on directives.
But in both cases there both optimized for Intel platforms.
But TBB is not limited to Intel compliers.
You can use this with any compatible
complier, so you can use it with GCC as well.
Where OpenMP the specification you know it depends
on whether the complier actually supports it.
And then there are some developers that need cross OS
platform support, in fact Apple delivers Safari now
on Windows and so OpenMP is supported on
all of Intel's compliers and so is TBB.
So TBB is supported across the
OS, Windows, Linux and Mac OS X.
You can actually download those
compliers and tools from Intel's website.
I believe that most of them have like a 30 day trial period.
I encourage you to actually go
ahead and download and try them.
So what is TBB offer?
It basically offers parallels constructs as well.
It offers the parallel for and the parallel reduction
which we actually saw in operation with Mike's demo.
But it also supports a parallel while so we no longer
have to have a fix to find termination index point
for the parallel while implementation or paradigm.
In OpenMP you had to define that last index and
it couldn't change, you couldn't change the value
within the for loop itself, while, in the
parallel while you can actually make those changes,
you can have that updated and operated
on within the parallel while.
There is also support for parallel scan, sort
and then the concepts of liner pipelining
so you can actually have multiple
threads that are pipelined and add
and insert basically filter stages
that can be operated on the data.
In addition to the parallel constructs its supports
container classes, so there is a lot of defined classes
that allow you to have threaded safe implementations of
something like a hashmap vector or a queue class as well.
TBB supports task space scheduling so
vary similar in so respects to Open MP
where you could have the parallel sections.
In this case you could define the task space
somewhat like the task Q in Apple's implementation
and then you can define your own task
scheduler to operate on that, those tasks.
It supports the synchronization both atomic
operation as well as mutual exclusion,
there are several flavors of mutual
exclusions that are supported.
There is the kind of the unfair mutual exclusion,
you try it, if you don't get it the your try again
and maybe you get it but not necessarily fair your not,
just cause you tried it the first time does not mean
that you are the first person that's going to
be able to get the, in there the second time.
So there's queuing mutexes which allow you
actually queue up the request to the mutex
so it's a more fair first come
first serve type of implementation.
There's also read-write mutexes, queuing read-write as
well as spin versions of mutexes so when I was talking
about OpenMP and the fact that the synchronization all
have spin waits to hopefully avoid context switches.
You also have spin mutexes here as well in TBB.
And then just like OpenMP there are memory allocation
support for thread allocation and timing routines.
Now the benefit of theses, you know both of these
technologies is that because they are implemented either
as a library or as a pragma or a set of library routines
across platforms, across OS's is that now
if you implement it you get the
same functionality across the board.
Doesn't matter which OS you happen to be running on.
So let's do an example of a parallel for.
This is the same loop that we had before
implemented but what we're going to find its going
to be a little bit more complex to actually implement
TBB but hopefully by the end of this talk you'll see
that the complexity that TBB adds to your development pays
off in the performance that you could also get out of TBB.
So first of all you have to be
able to initialize the library,
you do this by including essentially the task
scheduler init.h and then using the name space
and then defining the task scheduler and that
initializes the library because it's a class bases object,
oriented based library you actually get the destructor and
you can terminate the task scheduler earlier if you like
but if you just exit out of the
main, it will clean up itself.
And then what we have to do it's we have to basically
implement the function okay in terms of an operator
that will operate on a variable range of tasks.
So now before where we define the full set of the data
or the full routine was from I equals 0 to I less then N,
we now have to kind of parameterize that so that the task
scheduler can now give that function or that routine kind
of the indexes on where to start and where to end.
And that can be dynamic and you'll
see why we actually do that
So here's the code that we actually have to add,
we actually put it in a class form and then we have
to implement the operator with kind of this
variable range class that goes along with it.
And then we actually implement the range class and
so this is kind of right out of the TBB's format
but this is actually implementing a custom range class.
You could actually use the default that is included
in TBB and that would mirror very much kind
of like what OpenMP does in terms of a dynamic scheduler.
Okay were it basically the default is a
divisible will be you know its divisible by one
and so it just gives you the next iteration that you are
actually going to have to operate on and that's the range.
But in this case I specifically picked this particular
implementation because it allows me to customize how
that gets divided, so I can change the beginning.
I can change how we're actually dividing the workload.
And so once we define the range class and we define
the function, now we can implement the parallel for.
Somewhat similar techniques are applied to the parallel
while, parallel sort, parallel scan type constructs.
But what makes this a little more different then
the OpenMP is because I was able to define it.
Now you can see that there's a custom range and I waited
it in the implementation range of the custom class instead
of it being equal, divided equally among the threads I
gave just two of the first two indexes to the first thread
and then three indexes to the second thread, four
to the third and five, and that kind of help waited
or you know did the load balancing my self based
on exactly knowing what the calculation was
and some of the performance that I expected it to have.
So what we are going to do is have Mike com up
and show the implementation of the demo using TBB
and we'll look at the performance of that as well.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Mike: So we have one last demo for
you guys that will be pretty quick.
I'll first show you the TBB code that it took
to implement when I did OpenMP and pthreads.
So I'll first show you the problem, the problem
is right here, well it's not really a problem.
It's where we put the workload in a split it up,
similar to what Phil showed you in the slides.
We basically called our update sub range for loop,
we called and we have it set up
to take the blocked range class.
And we call a parallel reduce right here, this
right here is similar to parallel for in TBB
but it does the reduction as well like in OpenMP.
And we get really pleasing results cause we didn't have
to do all the work we had with pthreads but we still had
to do a little more then we did with OpenMP.
So I showed all this already, I'll skip to the OpenMP
where we have the threaded getting decent results there.
I'll switch to POSIX threads, we're getting about 241
updates a second, and it'll just take a second to propagate.
We're getting about 248 updates with TBB or 242 it depends
just a little bit on what is going on in the screen.
But overall we got really good results with TBB.
We're not doing all the effort, a few threads it takes
care of, the task scheduling, how many threads we have
and all that stuff for not that much effort.
And I think Phil is going to end.
( Pause in speaking. )
>> Phil: Thank you, Mike.
If we can go back to the slides, so again what
we saw was, was a little bit more effort in TBB,
certainly understanding the class structure and the
implementation for TBB instead of the one or two lines
of code to get 90 percent of the performance
it probably was another 10 or 20 lines of code.
But we actually got slightly better
performance then the POSIX implementation.
We actually didn't go back to try to analyze
clearly if you want it to work a little bit harder
on the POSIX implementation you could certainly implement
and get equivalent or even better performance then TBB
but the important part is that it's the improvement
in the additional productivity that you achieve
from using these technologies, over doing the
implementation yourself and all the debugging that goes on.
So TBB certainly offers more common
threading model options then OpenMP.
There's still less debugging, more performance focus,
we're still focused on the performance we can
implement custom type workload implementations
and ranges to help balance out the workload.
But there is a higher learning code then OpenMP and again
you can achieve the same performance or better with POSIX,
it's just going to take a lot more effort.
So clearly there's still software engineering
that is required you know you have to
modify and think about the algorithm.
The first example with the, the example
where we had to change the serial code
to support better improved parallelism,
that part is still required.
OpenMP, TBB or any other application or technology
is not going to remove that from the equation.
You have to understand that data sharing and
synchronization that goes on, again OpenMP allows you
to express it a little more cleanly and
concisely but it doesn't do it for you.
You have to analyze the workload behavior and
balance that workload again if you are so focused
on the POSIX implementation, you are spending a lot of
time debugging and figuring out exactly where your bugs are
and not focused on the performance side, you know the
productivity is lost to that, so OpenMP and TBB allow you
to focus more on that workload balancing behavior.
And certainly you have to take into
account the hardware platform constraints.
For example, one thing that we didn't
encounter in this particular demo is the fact
that you know hardware had this certain cache line size.
If you have data that you happen to share on the same
cache line, even though you may not be updating the data,
or modifying the data or reading the data
between two threads you can cause implicit
false sharing between those cache lines.
That's a hardware platform issue that you have to be aware
of, OpenMP and TBB or any other technology is not going
to help do that, if you laid out your data that way.
So there's still a lot of effort that has to go in
but hopefully with something like OpenMP or TBB,
the focus is actually on the threading part and so in
summary you know we really want to be aggressive in terms
of threading the number of threads of execution are
going to increase, they have already, its accelerating.
It's going to be harder and harder to implement threading.
Open MP and TBB are alternative to improve your productivity
and your application performance clearly we have a demo
that we showed where we actually
exceeded the initial POSIX implementation.
Certainly they are all comparable in overall
performance but the level of effort and work required
to achieve that was significantly different.
And with greater productivity what we're really hoping
is that there is more opportunities for threading.
So if you have for loops that are only taking 10 or
15 percent of your applications time maybe its time
to start investigating those areas as
well for opportunities for threading.
If you can add a pragma, OpenMP pragma statement to a four
loop and reduce 15 percent down to you know down to two,
three, four percent you've already gained a 10 percent
improvement on your application for very little effort.